**Against The Pathological Application of Games**

> Games can seem like an utterly silly way to spend one’s time. We struggle and strain and sweat—and for what? The goals of games seem so arbitrary. Game players burn energy and effort, not on curing cancer or saving the environment, but on trying to beat each other at some unnecessary, invented activity. Why not spend that time on something real?
> 
> But the goals of a game aren’t actually arbitrary at all. They only seem arbitrary when we look in the wrong place. In the rest of life, we are used to justifying our goals by looking at the value of the goals themselves or by looking forward, to what follows from those goals. But with the goals of games, we often need to look *backward*. We need to look at the value of the activity of pursuing those goals. In ordinary practical life, we usually take the means for the sake of the ends. But in games, we can take up an end for the sake of the means. Playing games can be a *motivational inversion* of ordinary life.
> 
> Seeing this motivational structure will also help us to understand the essential nature of games. A game tells us to take up a particular goal. It designates abilities for us to use in pursuing that goal. It packages all that up with a set of obstacles, crafted to fit those goals and abilities. A game uses all these elements to sculpt a form of activity. And when we play games, we take on an alternate form of agency. We take on new goals and accept different sets of abilities. We give ourselves over to different—and focused—ways of inhabiting our own agency. Goals, ability, and environment: these are the means by which game designers practice their art. And we experience the game designer’s art by flexing our own agency to fit.
> 
> *“Games \- Agency as Art”, by C. Thi Nguyen*

Since the mid-20th century, the field of Game Theory has arisen to describe a series of social decision problems that are often called “games”, most famously amongst them the prisoner’s dilemma. In this essay, I argue that a game-theoretic framing of such problems is counterproductive and destructive to meaningful resolutions of such problems. 

To begin our analysis, however, we need a concrete definition of what a *game* is and why it matters. In his seminal analysis of games as an art form, Nguyen proposes that the main artistic medium of games is *agency*: while games incorporate other art forms in their production[^1], the true defining aspect of a game is the cultivation of a possibility space in the mind of the player. The agency is *imagined* because it is not true agency, in the sense that the player’s choices do not impact the world outside of the game. The goals of the game (getting the ball into the net, reaching a high score in a certain time, defeating the boss) are illusory, but the player enters into a magic circle or contract to take them seriously *for the duration of the game*, achieving these goals within the rules of the game and deriving satisfaction from that triumph. Taking the imaginary game-goals too seriously and acting outside the set parameters to achieve them (i.e. “cheating”) is deemed a false victory because it is a sign that you are performing a Goodhart’s law-style degenerate optimisation: For most people if you use a rocket launcher to shoot the football into the goal you won’t score any points, because you are no longer meaningfully playing in the agentic space set out by football’s designers. In other words, *you’re no longer playing football, so the points don’t matter*.

With this analysis in mind, we can take a look at whether the prisoner’s dilemma is, indeed, a game. The primary elements of our analysis are whether there is some cultivated agency or possibility space set out[^2], whether this agency is bounded by a set of constraints, and whether those moves are tied to achieving some goal that is game-dependent and hence illusory. Under this analysis, the prisoner’s dilemma as it is usually described is a game:

* The **illusory goal** of the game is to minimise your time in jail.  
* The **constraint** or premise of the game is that the two prisoners/players are isolated and cannot transmit information to each other.  
* The **agency** the game imparts is the choice to cooperate or defect.

So long as all of these conditions are fulfilled, a game-theoretic analysis can now be applied: for any given option, analyse the expected payout for each player, and assess each combination of moves and payouts to derive a nash equilibrium. The study of game theory can therefore be described as *the study of how to most effectively exercise a player’s in-game agency*. 

Indeed, it is this exercise that powers some of game theory’s most unintuitive and impactful results. The standard analysis of the prisoner’s dilemma says that, rather than cooperating to achieve a better outcome for everyone, if each prisoner is to maximise their objective they must defect. A more general case of this analysis is known as the tragedy of the commons, where many players can choose to cooperate or defect over a period of time in the context of managing a shared good all players have access to.

Now that we have defined a game, we can see why solutions to the prisoner’s dilemma that take the form “the prisoners should just break out of prison”, “the prisoners should have a secret code” etc. are unsatisfying from a game-theoretic perspective: it’s like saying the most effective way to win at football is to bring a drone and a rocket launcher. Similarly, games like the Trolley problem are interesting or frustrating (depending on your point of view) thanks to the constrained agency of the player: arguing that the setup of the problem is contrived is like saying that the player ought to be able to pick up the football since they have hands. In some sense, all games are contrived, the difference is the satisfaction we gain from obeying their contrivances.

However, there is a more insidious aspect to Game Theory. The prisoner’s dilemma or the tragedy of the commons is often used as an argument for why cooperation is impossible or often fails in the real world. Moved by such arguments and confirmation bias with real life examples, defecting becomes accepted as a baseline policy, and any cooperation is seen as a miracle or the result of some edge case such as a higher power imposing cooperation on two squabbling players. However, this belief is only insidious if it is derived from false premises: after all, if rational or rational-enough actors truly have a foolproof analysis as to why defection is the best base policy in cooperation games, then this is a tragic truth rather than an insidious lie.

Why is this migration of conclusions from games to reality insidious, then? Game theory purports to be about perfect agents and their choices. However, recall that the definition of a game is not only what you *can* do, but what you *cannot*. Games are contextually dependent and inject their context as the axiomatic foundations of the game-world. The possibility space of most games constrains at least as much as it enables: If you are able to break these strict constraints on player agency[^3] then the conclusions of any game-theoretic analysis fall apart, their payout matrices crumbling into the mire of relativity and infinite hypotheticals[^4]. 

We can of course respect this artificiality to play a game and extract satisfaction, e.g. by agreeing not to pick up the ball in football. This self-awareness does not go both ways, however. The implication of many game-theoretic analyses of geopolitical cooperation, climate cooperation etc is that if rational players defect in the game they have set up they will also defect in real life, that the artificial model of the game is an accurate enough model of reality such that conclusions in one can be effectively projected to the other. In other words, this brand of analysis demands that you keep real life non-linear problem-solving out of the game, but demands that the conclusions drawn from the game be applied into real life with no such caveats. The game-theoretic football analyst knows that that touching a ball with your hands is possible only for the goalkeepers of the world, and even then only if they are standing in front of goal-shaped objects.

The usual game theoretic solution to such arguments is to shape the constraints of the game to better model reality. We can play many rounds of the prisoner’s dilemma, with players having some memory of previous rounds, such that their agency can be better shaped by their models of their opponent. We can introduce means of signalling intent into the commons game, or introduce more parallel tracks in the trolley problem. Yet, no matter how elaborate these premises become, they remain *games*. Recall that participating in a game involves the *conscious adoption* of illusory game-goals as your temporary objectives. Standing in two rows before the referee blows the whistle in football is a form of conscious buy in, the same thing we do when we read the rules of the trolley problem and agree to consider what we would do in that game-world seriously. *The necessary pre-condition of playing a game is to know that a game exists and to agree to play.* In most social situations, this *tabula rasa*\-eque buy in does not exist, both because of contrasting factors like honour, emotion, pre-commitments etc. but also because of imperfect communication and information asymmetry. Kicking a ball at someone on their phone does not mean that you are now playing football with them.

Of course, game theory does have particular applications. Game theory describes useful equilibra that can be aimed for or avoided in the design of large scale social systems like markets or incentive structures, where agents are relatively impersonal, have access to ample information and consciously buy in to participation. However, in the domain which game theory finds itself (mis)applied most often, that of the social sphere, knowledge of such a theory can often become counterproductive. This is because the knowledge of some optimal strategy *in the context of a game* biases one’s attitudes towards both what actions they should take and even *what actions are available* in their internal conception of the “game”. In short, the reference frame of “I am playing a game” causes them to rule out cooperative or supposedly “suboptimal” strategies. Game theory, designed to assist in reasoning about problems becomes a hazard to reasoning accurately about problems because it turns problems into games and imagines that conclusions can propagate backwards with perfect accuracy.

[^1]:  Just as books can have illustrations, movies props etc.

[^2]:  Usually expressed as some defined list of valid options or moves within the game

[^3]:  E.g. to communicate or make binding commitments in the prisoner’s dilemma, or create common norms obeyed by all players in the commons game enforced by social convention, a deposit from each player, or external authority. For more examples see Elinor Ostrom, *Governing the Commons*.

[^4]:  An excellent example of a game which embeds its intended conclusions in the premise of the game is Newcomb’s paradox. Because the setup of the game demands that the predictor is perfect i.e. incapable of error, any decision made by the player to change their policy *after the predictor makes their prediction* must propagate backwards in time to retroactively make the predictor correct. The perfect predictor must be perfect per the rules of the game, so the outcome cannot be wrong. Similarly, in the prisoner’s dilemma the constraints of the game (that the prisoners cannot cooperate or coordinate in any way) make cooperation a suboptimal strategy, which is then taken as some statement about the players when in fact it largely reflects the setup of the game. The players cannot cooperate because the game says they cannot, so cooperation is “revealed” to be a poor strategy.